# Using rstac and CQL2 to query STAC APIs

This tutorial builds upon the [“Download data from a STAC API using R,
rstac, and GDAL” tutorial](rstac.qmd) tutorial, developing more
complicated STAC queries using rstac to find, download, and process
Landsat data using STAC metadata. That tutorial walks through building
queries with rstac, using typical R functions to compose queries and
download data. This tutorial walks through using rstac for more complex
queries, based on [CQL2](https://portal.ogc.org/files/96288) and the
[STAC API Filter
Extension](https://github.com/stac-api-extensions/filter/), and using
the metadata provided by STAC APIs to filter through items and process
assets.

To run this tutorial, you’ll need the rstac and sf packages. If
necessary, you can install both packages via `install.packages()`:

``` r
install.packages("sf")
install.packages("rstac")
```

As in the last tutorial, we’re going to start off by querying
Microsoft’s [Planetary
Computer](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com) STAC API to get data
for Ashe County, North Carolina. Let’s go ahead and load the geometry
for the county:

``` r
ashe <- sf::read_sf(system.file("shape/nc.shp", package = "sf"))[1, ]
```

Let’s try and get Landsat imagery for this area from January 2021. As we
saw last time, we’re able to find all the STAC Items that match this
description using `rstac::stac_search()`, providing our bounding box,
time range, and desired data collection as regular function arguments.
To get all the Landsat images for this spatiotemporal area of interest,
we might write our query like this:

``` r
ashe_bbox <- ashe |>
  sf::st_transform(4326) |>
  sf::st_bbox()

stac_query <- rstac::stac(
  "https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/api/stac/v1"
) |>
  rstac::stac_search(
    collections = "landsat-c2-l2",
    bbox = ashe_bbox,
    datetime = "2021-01-01/2021-01-31"
  ) |>
  rstac::get_request()

stac_query
```

    ###STACItemCollection
    - features (12 item(s)):
      - LE07_L2SP_017035_20210127_02_T1
      - LC08_L2SP_018035_20210126_02_T1
      - LC08_L2SP_018034_20210126_02_T1
      - LC08_L2SP_017035_20210119_02_T1
      - LE07_L2SP_018035_20210118_02_T1
      - LE07_L2SP_018034_20210118_02_T2
      - LE07_L2SP_017035_20210111_02_T2
      - LC08_L2SP_018035_20210110_02_T1
      - LC08_L2SP_018034_20210110_02_T1
      - LC08_L2SP_017035_20210103_02_T1
      - LE07_L2SP_018035_20210102_02_T1
      - LE07_L2SP_018034_20210102_02_T2
    - assets: 
    ang, atmos_opacity, atran, blue, cdist, cloud_qa, coastal, drad, emis, emsd, green, lwir, lwir11, mtl.json, mtl.txt, mtl.xml, nir08, qa, qa_aerosol, qa_pixel, qa_radsat, red, rendered_preview, swir16, swir22, tilejson, trad, urad
    - item's fields: 
    assets, bbox, collection, geometry, id, links, properties, stac_extensions, stac_version, type

As we can see, this returns 12 separate items. We can also see that
those items seem to have different prefixes in their names; some start
with LE07, while others start with LC08. We might be able to guess what
this means (spoiler alert, LE07 corresponds to Landsat-7 imagery, while
LC08 is Landsat-8), but we might also not know which of these items are
actually relevant to our search.

Luckily enough, STAC items include useful metadata about what their
associated assets actually represent. This metadata gets converted by
rstac into a list, which is then stored in the `properties` element of
each item in our item collection. We can look at the names of these item
properties to get a sense of what metadata is available for each of our
items:

``` r
lapply(stac_query$features, \(x) names(x$properties)) |> 
  unlist() |> 
  unique()
```

     [1] "gsd"                         "created"                    
     [3] "sci:doi"                     "datetime"                   
     [5] "platform"                    "proj:epsg"                  
     [7] "proj:shape"                  "description"                
     [9] "instruments"                 "eo:cloud_cover"             
    [11] "proj:transform"              "view:off_nadir"             
    [13] "landsat:wrs_row"             "landsat:scene_id"           
    [15] "landsat:wrs_path"            "landsat:wrs_type"           
    [17] "view:sun_azimuth"            "landsat:correction"         
    [19] "view:sun_elevation"          "landsat:cloud_cover_land"   
    [21] "landsat:collection_number"   "landsat:collection_category"

Many of these fields are defined by the STAC specification as [common
metadata](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/blob/master/item-spec/common-metadata.md),
which defines fields that should mean the same thing across multiple
data providers. For instance, the `platform` field should detail the
“unique name of the specific platform to which the instrument is
attached”, which means that we should be able to use it to confirm that
the item naming conventions do in fact correspond to whether an image
comes from Landsat-7 or Landsat-8:

``` r
lapply(
  stac_query$features, 
  \(x) data.frame(id = x$id, platform = x$properties$platform)
) |> 
  do.call(what = rbind)
```

                                    id  platform
    1  LE07_L2SP_017035_20210127_02_T1 landsat-7
    2  LC08_L2SP_018035_20210126_02_T1 landsat-8
    3  LC08_L2SP_018034_20210126_02_T1 landsat-8
    4  LC08_L2SP_017035_20210119_02_T1 landsat-8
    5  LE07_L2SP_018035_20210118_02_T1 landsat-7
    6  LE07_L2SP_018034_20210118_02_T2 landsat-7
    7  LE07_L2SP_017035_20210111_02_T2 landsat-7
    8  LC08_L2SP_018035_20210110_02_T1 landsat-8
    9  LC08_L2SP_018034_20210110_02_T1 landsat-8
    10 LC08_L2SP_017035_20210103_02_T1 landsat-8
    11 LE07_L2SP_018035_20210102_02_T1 landsat-7
    12 LE07_L2SP_018034_20210102_02_T2 landsat-7

This metadata can be really useful to let us decide which items we want
to download from, without needing to download the whole data object! To
query using these fields, however, we’re going to need to build our
queries in a different way. Namely, rather than using
`rstac::stac_search()`, we’re going to have to write our queries in
Common Query Language, or CQL2. CQL2 is [a draft OGC
standard](https://docs.ogc.org/DRAFTS/21-065.html) setting out “a
generic filter grammar \[…\] used in query operations to identify the
subset of resources, such as features, that should be included in a
response”. STAC APIs which implement the [filter
extension](https://github.com/stac-api-extensions/filter) can accept
CQL2 queries, which can help you filter down the set of items returned
by the API.

CQL2 has a number of component pieces which define logical operators,
spatial and temporal filters, and other filtering functiions. We’re
going to focus primarily on how to use the most basic components to find
items that intersect our spatiotemporal area of interest and have the
properties we desire.

Luckily, rstac supports writing CQL2 queries through the
`rstac::ext_filter()` function, turning R’s logcal operators and objects
into valid CQL2 queries. This function helps to translate R expressions
into CQL2 that can be sent as a query to a STAC API. A handful of helper
functions, prefixed with `cql2_`, also help translate R objects into
valid CQL2 representations.

For instance, to turn our `stac_search()` query into an `ext_filter()`
query, we’ll need to convert both our bounding box and datetime
arguments. We can convert our bounding box into a representation that
`ext_filter()` can use via `rstac::cql2_bbox_as_geojson()`:

``` r
ashe_bbox_geojson <- rstac::cql2_bbox_as_geojson(ashe_bbox)
ashe_bbox_geojson
```

    $type
    [1] "Polygon"

    $coordinates
    $coordinates[[1]]
              [,1]     [,2]
    [1,] -81.74091 36.23444
    [2,] -81.23971 36.23444
    [3,] -81.23971 36.58973
    [4,] -81.74091 36.58973
    [5,] -81.74091 36.23444

And we can convert our datetime into a valid interval using
`rstac::cql2_interval()`:

``` r
time_range <- rstac::cql2_interval("2021-01-01", "2021-01-31")
time_range
```

    interval("2021-01-01", "2021-01-31")

With these objects converted, we’re then able to build a query that uses
CQL2 using `rstac::ext_filter()`. Rather than providing our filters as
function arguments, like we did with `stac_search()`, we’re going to
instead provide `ext_filter()` with a single query expression that
combines all of the filters we care about. For instance, to request only
items belonging to the Landsat collection, we’ll use `==` to filter to
only items whose collection is `landsat-c2-l2`:

``` r
rstac::stac("https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/api/stac/v1") |>
  rstac::ext_filter(
    collection == "landsat-c2-l2"
  )
```

    ###RSTACQuery
    - url: https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/api/stac/v1
    - params:
      - filter: collection = 'landsat-c2-l2'
    - field(s): version, base_url, endpoint, params, verb, encode

In addition to using logical operators, we’ll also use spatial and
temporal operators to limit our results to only our area of interest.
For instance, we’ll use the `t_intersects` CQL2 function and our
`time_range` variable to limit our results to just January 2021. We’ll
need to wrap our variable in `{{}}` to tell rstac to replace the
variable name with its contents:

``` r
rstac::stac("https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/api/stac/v1") |>
  rstac::ext_filter(
    collection == "landsat-c2-l2" &&
      t_intersects(datetime, {{time_range}})
  )
```

    ###RSTACQuery
    - url: https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/api/stac/v1
    - params:
      - filter: collection = 'landsat-c2-l2' AND T_INTERSECTS(datetime,INTERVAL('2021-01-01','2021-01-31'))
    - field(s): version, base_url, endpoint, params, verb, encode

Notice how we used `&&` to combine these two filters, restricting our
results to only items that satisfy both conditions. Also notice how the
`filter` parameter in our rstac query has changed, including a call to
`T_INTERSECTS()`!

Similarly, we’ll need to use the `s_intersects()` CQL2 function to
restrict our results to our spatial area of interest using our
`ashe_bbox_geojson` variable:

``` r
rstac::stac("https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/api/stac/v1") |>
  rstac::ext_filter(
    collection == "landsat-c2-l2" &&
      t_intersects(datetime, {{time_range}}) &&
      s_intersects(geometry, {{ashe_bbox_geojson}})
  )
```

    ###RSTACQuery
    - url: https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/api/stac/v1
    - params:
      - filter: collection = 'landsat-c2-l2' AND T_INTERSECTS(datetime,INTERVAL('2021-01-01','2021-01-31')) AND S_INTERSECTS(geometry,POLYGON((-81.740905671483 36.234442085901,-81.2397076336137 36.234442085901,-81.2397076336137 36.589729047258,-81.740905671483 36.589729047258,-81.740905671483 36.234442085901)))
    - field(s): version, base_url, endpoint, params, verb, encode

This query is equivalent to the one we constructed via `stac_search()`:
we’re filtering our results based on collection and spatiotemporal
range. To execute it against Planetary Computer, we’re going to need to
use `post_request()`, rather than `get_request()`, to send this query as
an HTTP POST rather than GET request:

``` r
rstac::stac("https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/api/stac/v1") |>
  rstac::ext_filter(
    collection == "landsat-c2-l2" &&
      t_intersects(datetime, {{time_range}}) &&
      s_intersects(geometry, {{ashe_bbox_geojson}})
  ) |>
  rstac::post_request()
```

    ###STACItemCollection
    - features (12 item(s)):
      - LE07_L2SP_017035_20210127_02_T1
      - LC08_L2SP_018035_20210126_02_T1
      - LC08_L2SP_018034_20210126_02_T1
      - LC08_L2SP_017035_20210119_02_T1
      - LE07_L2SP_018035_20210118_02_T1
      - LE07_L2SP_018034_20210118_02_T2
      - LE07_L2SP_017035_20210111_02_T2
      - LC08_L2SP_018035_20210110_02_T1
      - LC08_L2SP_018034_20210110_02_T1
      - LC08_L2SP_017035_20210103_02_T1
      - LE07_L2SP_018035_20210102_02_T1
      - LE07_L2SP_018034_20210102_02_T2
    - assets: 
    ang, atmos_opacity, atran, blue, cdist, cloud_qa, coastal, drad, emis, emsd, green, lwir, lwir11, mtl.json, mtl.txt, mtl.xml, nir08, qa, qa_aerosol, qa_pixel, qa_radsat, red, rendered_preview, swir16, swir22, tilejson, trad, urad
    - item's fields: 
    assets, bbox, collection, geometry, id, links, properties, stac_extensions, stac_version, type

As you can see, the results from this query are exactly equivalent to
those from `stac_search()`. For straightforward queries like this,
`stac_search()` provides an easier and friendlier interface for
constructing requests. However, using CQL2 via `ext_filter()` allows us
to take full advantage of the metadata provided by the STAC API.

For instance, we could also filter our results to only include data from
Landsat-8, using the `platform` property that we examined earlier. To do
so, we’ll add another filter using `==` to our query:

``` r
rstac::stac("https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/api/stac/v1") |>
  rstac::ext_filter(
    collection == "landsat-c2-l2" &&
      t_intersects(datetime, {{time_range}}) &&
      s_intersects(geometry, {{ashe_bbox_geojson}}) && 
      platform == "landsat-8"
  ) |>
  rstac::post_request()
```

    ###STACItemCollection
    - features (6 item(s)):
      - LC08_L2SP_018035_20210126_02_T1
      - LC08_L2SP_018034_20210126_02_T1
      - LC08_L2SP_017035_20210119_02_T1
      - LC08_L2SP_018035_20210110_02_T1
      - LC08_L2SP_018034_20210110_02_T1
      - LC08_L2SP_017035_20210103_02_T1
    - assets: 
    ang, atran, blue, cdist, coastal, drad, emis, emsd, green, lwir11, mtl.json, mtl.txt, mtl.xml, nir08, qa, qa_aerosol, qa_pixel, qa_radsat, red, rendered_preview, swir16, swir22, tilejson, trad, urad
    - item's fields: 
    assets, bbox, collection, geometry, id, links, properties, stac_extensions, stac_version, type

We could also use other logical operators to filter these results down
further. For instance, the `eo:cloud_cover` property, part of the
[electro-optical STAC extension](https://github.com/stac-extensions/eo),
provides an estimate of how much of each image is covered by clouds. We
could add a filter to restrict our results to only include images with
less than 10% cloud cover using this property and `<`:

``` r
rstac::stac("https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/api/stac/v1") |>
  rstac::ext_filter(
    collection == "landsat-c2-l2" &&
      t_intersects(datetime, {{time_range}}) &&
      s_intersects(geometry, {{ashe_bbox_geojson}}) && 
      platform == "landsat-8" && 
      `eo:cloud_cover` < 10
  ) |>
  rstac::post_request()
```

    ###STACItemCollection
    - features (1 item(s)):
      - LC08_L2SP_018034_20210110_02_T1
    - assets: 
    ang, atran, blue, cdist, coastal, drad, emis, emsd, green, lwir11, mtl.json, mtl.txt, mtl.xml, nir08, qa, qa_aerosol, qa_pixel, qa_radsat, red, rendered_preview, swir16, swir22, tilejson, trad, urad
    - item's fields: 
    assets, bbox, collection, geometry, id, links, properties, stac_extensions, stac_version, type

rstac is able to translate several other R expressions into CQL2
representations. For a list of supported R expressions and other
examples, [check out the rstac
documentation](https://brazil-data-cube.github.io/rstac/articles/rstac-02-cql2.html).
